标题：基于深度学习的海关虚假贸易案件罚款金额预测摘要
 近年来，中国对外进出口经济贸易呈飞速增长趋势，与此同时，海关进出口违规违法案件数量也随之不断增加。为保证进出口贸易健康有序发展，海关法务人员需要加大对虚假贸易案件的打击力度，并根据案件描述文本预测对应罚款金额。然而，海关相关法务人员目前主要依赖于人工方法来对案件文本进行分析，并据此预测罚款金额，工作量大且效率低下。 
针对以上分析，本文提出一种基于深度学习的海关虚假贸易案件罚款金额预测模型。
具体而言，本文主要研究内容如下： 
（1）在虚假贸易案件文本分析过程中，本文采用传统文本分析模型 Quick-thoughs来对案件文本进行编码。而考虑到 Quick-thoughs 模型采用 GRU 来对文本进行编码，而案情文本通常较长，GRU 无法捕获案情文本中的长距离依赖问题，从而会影响到案件分析的准确性。针对这一问题，本文使用 Transformer-XL 模型替代 Quick-thoughts 模型中的 GRU 模块，来解决 GRU 无法对超过固定长度的依赖关系建模的问题，以生成准确性较高且语义表达较为充分的文本向量表示。 
（2）为从文本向量中充分学习语义信息从而准确预测罚款金额，本文基于 Encoder-Decoder 框架设计并建立罚款预测模块。具体而言，本文使用 Bi-LSTM 模型作为 Encoder，以更好地从案件文本向量中更准确地学习语义信息；在 Encoder 与 Decoder 之间，本文引入注意力机制模块，以区分不同句子对最终罚款金额的不同影响程度，从而更准确地对 Encoder 中所得的各个句子语义进行表示；最后，本文使用 CNN 模型作为 Decoder，以处理高维度的向量表示，从而实现最终的罚款金额预测。 
（3）基于真实海关贸易数据的多项对比实验表明，本文提出的模型在真实数据集上能有效提高罚款金额预测任务的 RSME、MAPE 和一致率指标。 
本文工作在海关司法领域有效提高了案件罚款金额预测的准确率，是海关虚假贸易案件的罚款金额处理办法的新思路和新方法，也是深度学习技术应用于海关司法领域的一次新的探索。 
   关键词：深度学习；罚款金额预测模型；文本向量；Quick-thoughts 模型；注意力机制 

Abstract
  The expeditious growth of China's import and export economy and trade has been witnessed recently. Simultaneously, the violations in imports and export are increased.  In order to ensure the healthy and orderly development of import and export trade, customs legal officers need to increase efforts to crack down on false trade cases and predict the corresponding fines based on the case description text. However, customs legal officer currently mainly rely on manual methods to analyze case texts and predict the number of fines based on this, which is heavy and inefficient. 
Because of the above analysis, this thesis proposes a deep learning-based model for predicting the number of fines in customs false trade cases. The main contents of the thesis as followed: 
(1) In the process of text analysis of false trade cases, this thesis uses the traditional text analysis model Quick-thoughts to encode the case text. Considering that the Quick-thoughts model uses GRU to encoder the text, and the case text is usually longer, GRU can not capture the long-distance dependence problem in the case text, which will affect the accuracy of the case analysis. In response to this problem, this thesis uses the Transformer-XL model to replace the GRU module in the Quick-thought model to solve the problem that GRU cannot model dependencies that exceed a fixed length, to generate text with high accuracy and sufficient semantic expression Vector Representation. 
(2) In order to fully learn semantic information from the text vector to accurately predict the number of fines, a suitable prediction model based on the Encoder-Decoder framework has been designed and built in this thesis. Specifically, this thesis uses the Bi-LSTM model as the Encoder to better learn semantic information from the case text vector; The attention mechanism module has been introduced between the Encoder and Decoder to achieve the semantic expression of each sentence, to classify the influential caused by the final forfeit. 
Finally, this thesis uses the CNN model as the Decoder to process high-dimensional vector representations, to achieve the final fine amount prediction.  (3) Multiple comparison experiments based on real customs trade data show that the model proposed in this thesis can effectively improve the RMSE, MAPE,  and consistency rate indicators of the fine amount prediction task on the real data set.  The work of this thesis has effectively improved the accuracy in customs false trade cases in the customs judicial field, which can be regarded as a novel idea and method for handling   III fines in customs false trade cases, also a new exploration of deep learning applied in the customs justice. 
 Keywords: Deep Learning; Penalty Amount Prediction Model; Text Vector; The Quick-thoughts Model; Attentional Mechanism 